# 1. Introduction AZ-100 - Microsoft Azure Fundamentals

## Content Outline
- 15-25% Cloud Concepts
- 30-35% Azure Core Services
- 25-30% Security, Privacy, Compliance and Trust.
- 20-25% Pricing and Support

## Grading
- 60 minutes.
- Passing Grade is 700/1000 - but you need to get higher than 70% due to scaled scoring.
- There are 40-60 questions, you can afford to get 12-18 wrong.
### Format of Questions
1. Multiple Choice
2. Multiple Answer
3. Drag and Drop
4. Hot Area (Couple of drop-downs).

# 2. Cloud Concepts

## 2.1 What is Cloud Computing?
- Definition: The practise of using a network fo remote servers hosted on the Internet to store, manage, and process data, rather than a local server or a personal computer.
  - Local refers to on-premise where you own the servers, infrastructure, risk (i.e. your own data center).
  - Cloud providers refer to where someone else (the provider) owns the servers, infrastructure, and risk.
    - You are left with configuring cloud services and code.

### Dedicated Servers
- **One physical machine** dedicated to a single business. Runs a single web-app/site.
- Very expensive, high maintenance, however you have a greater level of security/configuration (depending on use-case).

### Virtual Private Servers
- **One physical machine** dedicated to a single business. 
  - The physical machine is virtualized into sub-machines which runs multiple web-apps/sites.

### Shared Hosting
- **One physical machine** shared by hundreds of businesses, relies on most tenants under-utilizing their resources (e.g. Wordpress).
  - Very cheap, but a lot of limitations.

### Cloud Hosting
- **Multiple physical machines** that act as one system. The system is abstracted into multiple cloud services.
  - This model is flexible, scalable, secure, cost-effective and highly configurable.

## 2.2 Common Cloud Services
- A cloud provider can have hundreds of cloud services that are grouped into various types. The 4 most common types of cloud services for Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) would be:
  - Compute: a virtual machine that can run applications, programs and code.
  - Storage: virtual hard-drives that you can store files/data.
  - Networking: virtual network being able to define connections or isolate networks.
  - Databases: virtual databases for storing data for applications.

## 2.3 What is Azure
- Microsoft calls their cloud provider service Microsoft Azure.
  - Azure means bright blue colour of the cloudless sky.
- Cloud service providers can be initialized to CSPs.

## 2.4 Benefits of Cloud Computing
- **Cost-effective**: you pay for what you consume, no up-front cost. Pay as you go (PAYG) with thousands of customers sharing the cost of resources.
- **Global**: Launch workloads *anywhere in the world*, just choose a region.
- **Secure**: Cloud provider takes care of physical security. Cloud services can be secure by default, or you have ability to configure access down to the granular level.
- **Reliable**: data backups, data recovery, and data replication, and fault tolerance.
- **Scalable**: increase or decrease resources and services based on demand.
- **Elastic**: automate scaling during spikes and drop in demand.
- **Current**: Underlying hardware and managed software is patched, upgraded and replaced by the CSP without interruption to you (or fewer than you would have vs. on-premise).

## 2.5 Types of Cloud Computing
- **SaaS**: a product that is run and managed by the service provider.
  - No concern on how the service is maintained, only that it works and remains available.
  - e.g. Salesforce, Office 365, Gmail
- **PaaS**: focus on development, deployment and management of your applications.
  - Don't worry about provisioning, configuration, or hardware/OS.
  - Mostly for developers that are building apps and not concerned for the underlying infrastructure.
  - e.g. Elastic Beanstalk (AWS), Heroku, Google App Engine.
- **IaaS**: basic building blocks for cloud, provides access to networking features, computers and data storage space.
  - No concern for IT staff, data centers, and hardware.
  - e.g. Microsoft Azure, AWS, Oracle Cloud.

## 2.6 Types of Cloud Computing Responsibiltiies
- **CSP** - Cloud Service Provider is responsible.
- **C** - Customer is responsible.

| Layer | On Premise | IaaS | PaaS | SaaS |
|-------|------------|------|------|------|
| Application | C | C | C | CSP |
| Data | C | C | C | CSP |
| Runtime | C | C | CSP | CSP |
| Middleware | C | C | CSP | CSP |
| OS | C | C | CSP | CSP |
| Virtualization | C | CSP | CSP | CSP |
| Servers | C | CSP | CSP | CSP |
| Storage | C | CSP | CSP | CSP |

- SaaS provides customers with the least responsibilty.
- On-premise provides customers with the most responsibility.

## 2.7 Azure Deployment Models
- **Public Cloud**: Everything built on the CSP (i.e. Cloud-Native).
  - Most cost-effective. Security controls by default but might not meet security requirements. Configuration limited. No need in-depth knowledge of underlying infrastructure.
- **Private Cloud**: Everything built on company's data centers. 
  - e.g. uses open-source cloud software: OpenStack. 
  - Most expensive. Security is managed by the owner, and can meet any security compliance requirement. Configuration to how you like. Need to know in-depth knowledge in all levels of infrastructure.
- **Hybrid**: Uses both On-Premise and CSP.
  - Could be more cost-effective based on what you offload to the cloud. Can meet security requirements. Best of both worlds, however you need to know how to configure levels of infrastructure and know CSP services.

## 2.8 Total Cost of Ownership (TCO)
- On-Premise may have a lot of hidden costs (physical security hardware, IT personnel, maintenance).
- Cloud has subscription fees, but less hidden costs.
- Generalized to **75% savings** moving from On-Premise to Cloud.

## 2.9 Capital vs. Operational Expenditure
- CAPEX: Spending money upfront on physical infrastructure. Deducting that expense from your tax bill over time.
  - Sever, storage, network (routers, cable, switches), backup and archive costs.
- OPEX: The cost associated with an on-premise data center that has shifted to the CSP. Customers are now concerned with the non-physical costs.
  - Leasing software, training software, paying for cloud support, billing based on cloud usage.

## 2.10 Cloud Architecture Terminology
- Availability: The amount of time the network is up and running.
  - High Availability (HA).
- Scalability: The ability to increase network capacity as demand increases, and the ability to reduce network capacity when demand decreases.
  - Similar to Elasticity
- Performance: The quantity of bits sent and received per second.
- Fault Tolerance: The ability to prevent a failure.
- Disaster Recovery - The ability to recover from a failure.

## 2.11 High Availability
- The ability for your service to remain available by ensuring there is no single point of failure and/or ensure a certain level of performance.
  - e.g. Run several redundant servers behind a load balancer (Azure Load Balancer).
- Having servers in different data centers will also provide redundancy in the event that a data center becomes unavailable.
- **Availability Zones** are abstracted as servers in a data center. Having workload across multiple availabiltiy zones ensures that your services/applicaitons remain available.
- **Load Balancer** allows you to evenly distribute traffic to multiple servers in one or more data centers.
  - LBs can route traffic using round-robin, or based on specific metrics e.g. % CPU usage.
  - LBs are smart enough to know that if a server is not healthy (e.g. does not respond to a health-check ping), future requests will not be routed there.

## 2.12 High Scalability
- The ability to increase your capacity based on the increasing demand of traffic, memory, and computing power.
- Vertical Scaling: Upgrade server with more performance.
- Horizontal Scaling (Scaling Out): Adding more servers of the same size.

## 2.13 High Elasticity
- The ability to automatically increase or decrease your capacity based on the current demand of traffic, memory, and computing power.
- Key is **automatic** vs. scalability.
- Vertical scaling is difficult for traditional architecture, so it is usually used in the context of horizontal scaling.
- Azure:
  - **Azure VM Scale Sets**: Automatically increase or decrease in response to demand or a defined scheduled.
  - **SQL Server Stretch Database**: Dynamically stretch warm and cold transactional data from Microsoft SQL Server to Microsoft Azure.

## 2.14 High Durability
- Your ability to recover from a disaster and to prevent the loss of data.
- Solutions are called Disaster Recovery (DR).
  - Backup, how fast you can restore from the backup. Does your backup stil work? How do you ensure current live data is not corrupt.

# 3. Evolution of Compute

## 3.1 Dedicated
- Physical server wholly utilized by a single computer.
- You have to estimate your capacity and usage - so you can overpay for an underutilized server
- Upgrading is expensive and will be slow.
- You are limited by your Operating System.
- Multiple apps/processes can result in conflicts in resource sharing.
  -  I/O bandwidth, CPU power, buffers, and swap space

## 3.2 VMs
- You can run multiple Virtual Machines on one machine.
- **Hypervisor** (aka. Virtual Machine Monitor) enables to creation and management of VMs. It runs on top of the host operating system.
- Each VM can run a Guest OS. There can an under-utilized VM.

## 3.3 Containers
- Containers are isolated, light-weight silos for running an application on a Host OS.
- Often times, containers are run in VMs.
  - Built on top of the Host OS' kernel.
  - Only contains apps and some lightweight OS APIs and services.
  - In contrast to VMs that run in its own complete operating system, including its own kernel. 
- MSDN Article: [Containers vs. VMs](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/virtualization/windowscontainers/about/)

## 3.4 Functions (Serverless)
- A managed VMs running managed containers.
- You upload a peice of code, choose the amount of memory and duration.
- Extremely cost effective, however there is a cold-start (delay when code is actually executed).

# 4. Global Infrastructure

## 4.1 Region and Geographies
- A **Region** is a grouping of multiple data centers (Availability Zones).
- A **Geography** is a discrete market of two or more regions that preserves data residency and compliancy boundaries.
  - Azure Geographies: United States, Azure Government (US), Canada, Brazil, Mexico.
  - Scenario: You are working in Canada for a Canadian Organization, and you want to ensure that the data will remain within Canada. You would therefore use Canada Azure Geographies.

## 4.2 Paired Regions
- Each Region is paired with another Region 300 miles away. Only one Region is updated at a time to ensure no outages.
- Some Azure Services rely on Paired Regions for Disaster Recovery, e.g. Azure Geo-redundant Storage (GRS)
  - GRS replicates data to a secondary region automatically, ensuring that data is durable even in the event that the primary region isn't recoverable.
- In Canada, Canad Central is paired with Canad East. US is US East and US West.

## 4.3 Region Types and Service Availability
- Not all Azure services are available in every region (security, compliance or legal reasons).
- There are two types of Regions:
  - **Recommended Region**: A Region that provides the broadest range of service capabiltiies and is designed to support Availability Zones now or in the future.
  - **Alternate Region**: A Region that extends Azure's footprint within a data residency boundary where a recommended region also exists. Not designed to support AZs. These Regions are labelled as Other in the Azure Portal.
- General Availability (GA) is when a service is considered ready to be used publicly by everyone.
  - Azure Cloud Services are grouped into three categories:
    1. Foundational: Service is going to be available immediately or 12 months in Recommended or Alternate Region.
    2. Mainstream: Service is going to be available immediately or 12 months in Recommended Region. May become available in Alternate based on demand.
    3. Specialized: Available in Recommended or Alternate Region based on demand.

## 4.4 Special Regions
- Azure has specialized regions to meet compliance or legal reasons:
  - e.g. US DoD Central, US Gov Virginia, US Gov Iowa.

## 4.5 Availability Zones (AZs)
- Is a **physical location** made up of one or more data centers.
- Regions will generally contain 3 Availability Zones.
  - Data centers within a region will be isolate from each other (i.e different buildings), but will be close enough to provide low-latency.
- Its common practice to run workloads in at least 3 AZs to ensure High Availability.

## 4.6 AZ Supported Regions
- Not every Region has support for Availability Zones, these regions are known as Alternate or Other. Recommended Regions are supposed to have at least 3 AZs.
  - The following Regions have a minimum of 3 AZs: Central US, East US 2, West US 2, ...
- In the Azure console, when you choose a Region without any AZs, the option for AZ will be blanked out and only "No Infrastructure Redundancy Required" will show.
  
## 4.7 Fault and Update Domains
- An AZ has a combination of a fault domain and an update domain.
  - **Fault Domain**: a logical grouping of hardware to avoid a single point of failure within an AZ. A group of virtual machines that share a common power source and network switch.
    - If part of a data center fails, then it won't affect the other hardware that is running.
  - **Update Domain**: Azure may need to apply updates to the underlying hardware and software. When it does, VMs will go offline. Update Domains ensure that your resources do not go offline.
  - **Availability Sets**: a logical grouping that you can use in Azure to ensure that the VMs you place in the Set are in different fault/update domains to avoid downtime.

# 5. Technology Overview

## 5.1 Computing Services
- **Azure Virtual Machines**: Windows or Linux virtual machinese. The most common type of compute. You choose your OS, memory, CPU, storage. You share hardware with other customers.
- **Azure Container Instances**: Docker as a Service to run containerize apps on Azure without provisioning servers or VMs.
- **Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS)**: Easy to deploy, manage and scale containerized applications. Uses the open source Kubernetes software.
- **Azure Service Fabric**: Tier 1 Enterprise Container as a Service. Its for distributed systems platform. Manage scalable and reliable microservices.
- **Azure Functions**: Event-driven, serverless compute functions to run code without provisioning or managing servers.
- **Azure Batch**: Plans, schedules and executes your batch computer workloads across running 100+ jobs in parallel. Use Spot VMs to save money.

## 5.2 Storage Services
- **Azure Blob Storage**: Object serverless storage. Store very large files and large amounts of unstructured files. Pay for what you store, unlimited storage, no-resizing volumes, no filesystem protocols.
- **Azure Disk Storage**: A virtual volume. Choose SSD or HDD, has encryption by default. Attach volume to VMs.
- **Azure File Storage**: A shared volume tht you can access and manage like a file server.
  - Used for when multiple VMs share the same hard drive.
- ***Azure Database Storage***: A NoSQL store that hosts unstructured data independent of any schema.
- **Azure Data Box**: Designed to store terabytes or petabytes of data.
- **Azure Archive Storage**: Long term storage for when you need to hold onto files for years.

## 5.3 Database Services
- **Azure Cosmos DB**: A fully managed NoSQL database. Designed for scale with guarantee of 99.999% availability.
  - Its their flagship database, as it works with incredible scale and performance.
- **Azure SQL Database**: A fully managed MS SQL database with auto-scale, integral intellegence.
- **Azure Database for MySQL / PSQL / MariaDB**: Fully managed and scalable MySQL / PostgresSQL/ MariaDB.
- **SQL Server on VMs**: Lift-and-shift MS SQL servers from on-premise to Azure Cloud.
- **Azure Database Migration Service**: Migrates your databases to the cloud with no application code changes.
- **Azure Cache for Redis**: Caches frequently used and static data to reduce data and application latency.

## 5.4 Application Integration Services
- **Azure Notifications Hub**: Pub/Sub service, send push notifications to any platform.
- **Azure API Apps**: API Gateway.
- Azure Service Bus: Cloud messenging as a service with simple integration.
- **Azure Stream Analytics:** Serverless real-time analytics from cloud to the edge.
- **Azure Logic Apps:** Schedule, automate, orchestrate tasks, business processes and workflows. Integration with Enterprise SaaS and Enterprise applications.
- **Azure Queue Storage**: Its a messenger queue, not really storage. But a data store for queieing and reliably dlivering messages between applications.

## 5.5 Developer and Mobile Tools
- **Azure SignalR Service**: Real-time messaging. Easily add real-time web functionality to applications.
  - Like Pusher, so you can implement: notifications, live location tracking, in-app chat.
- **Azure App Service:** Easy to use service for deploying and scaling web applications. Similar to Heroku for Azure, Elastic Beanstalk.

## 5.6 Azure DevOps Services
- **Azure Boards:** Kanban deliver value to your users faster using proven agile tools to plan, track, and discuss worka cross your team.
- **Azure Pipelines:** Build, test, and deploy with CI/CD that deploy continuously from any git repository.
- **Azure Repository**: Git repositories.
- **Azure Test Plans**: Test and Ship with confidence using manual and exploratory testing tools.
- **Azure Artifacts**: Create, host, and share packages with your team. e.g. Setting up environments.
- **Azure DevTest Labs**: Fast, easy and lean dev-test environments.

## 5.7 Azure Resource Manager
- Infrastructure as Code - using script/configuration to set up infrastructure.
- **Azure Resource Manager (ARM)**: programmatically create Azure templates via JSON template, similar to CloudFormation on AWS.

## 5.8 Azure QuickStart Templates
- A library of pre-made ARM templates provided by the community and partners to help launch projects quickly for a variety of stack scenarios.

## 5.9 Azure Virtual Networks
- A Virtual Network (AWS VPC) is a logically isolated section of the Azure Network where you launch your Azure resources. You choose a range of IPs using CIDR Range.
  - **CIDR**: Classless Inter-Domain Routing. IP addresses are described as consisting of two groups of bits in the address.
    1. The most significant bits are the network prefix, which identifies a whole network or subnet.
    2. The least significant set forms the host identifiers. 
- You can partition your Virtual Network into subnets. Subnets needs to have a smaller CIDR range than to the vNet.
- Public Subnets can reach the internet.
- Private Subnets cannot reach the internet.

## 5.10 Cloud-Native Networking Service
- **Azure DNS**: Provides an ultra-fast DNS response and ultra high domain availability.
- Azure Virtual Network.
- **Azure Load Balancer** (OSI Level 4 Transport), so it doesn't requests. Its lower level.
- **Azure Application Gateway** (OSI Level 7 HTTP Load Balancer) Understands HTTP requests, so it can route specific HTTP requests to specific applications. You can also apply a Web Application Firewall.
- Network Security Groups